7.0 Implementation
The following section will describe the implementation phase in
Instructional Design. If you recall from previous sections, the
ADDIE process isn’t linear, so implementation takes place
throughout the entire process. Additionally, there may be
different parts of the project that can be implemented at various
times depending on your deliverables and client needs.
The basic premise of implementation is that I've delivered my
product to the client and it’s being rolled out to their users. I've
developed it and handed it off. It is done (hopefully for your
sake). Many times this is where my job as an ID stops. I hand off
the project and that’s it. However, sometimes I am responsible
for implementation.
Regardless, one of the first things I do during implementation is
to create a lessons-learned document. This describes what I
have learned during the project thus far. It also includes any
special notes about the client or project. This is very useful if I
need to come back to the project or client in the future.
Assuming that I am responsible for more than just handing this
off to the client, then there are many other practices I have to
do to ensure my implementation goes smoothly. This could
involve installing the software on an LMS, setting up the LMS,
doing a train the trainer session, etc.
Many times, if they have an LMS, I may have to install the
software for them on the LMS. For example, I may have to add a
link in the LMS or even set up a course shell for them to teach
the course. If I'm lucky they will have an LMS administrator and I
don't have to do that. But you need to know how to do that so
that you can have that as an option, This can make life much
easier for both you and your client.
Another necessity may be to train-the-trainer (TTT). Train-the-
trainer sessions can mean many things. Am I training a trainer to
train all of the trainers? Am I training many trainers to deliver
courses? Am I training trainers to be subject matter experts?
There are times when you might even be the trainer, training
the end-user.
Next, we need to consider change management and
communication. If there is a significant change, I may need to
help ensure that it’s being managed correctly. For example, this
might involve implementing a change model, such as ADKAR
(change models are beyond the scope of this text). This is why
an ID needs to ensure they understand the change process so
that they can identify when it’s needed and can walk the client
through it.
Communication is usually part of the change process and
implementation. Are stakeholders aware of the training and its
impacts? Who is responsible for ensuring they have that
information? I have worked with clients who have a
communication team and others where I was expected to do it
myself.
A final note here, as you are doing implementation, you need to
be thinking ahead - to evaluation. Are you collecting the
appropriate data for evaluation? This is described in the next
section but be aware that you need to know what type of
evaluation the client might want to do so that you can collect
that data during implementation.
Remember, a poor implementation can make the greatest
training seem terrible. You have to make sure that
implementation is done well and it's smooth, successful, and
error-free.