8.0 Evaluation
The following section will discuss evaluation as it relates to
Instructional Design. There are a number of reasons why an
instructional designer needs to know how to do an evaluation
(*note we are not talking about assessments for objectives in
this section). Those can include something as simple as a quality
check to something difficult like trying to determine if a project’s
return on investment was met. We could be evaluating a course
or a program’s success. We can evaluate lots of different things.
The two types of evaluation that IDs focus on are formative and
summative. Formative evaluation is a small, simple evaluation,
like a review or pilot test.
In the instructional design process, we use these to assess our
quality, for example, I might have a subject matter expert review
my design. These types of formative evaluations are consistently
happening during many parts of the ID process. If you paid
attention in my other sections within this text I point out when
and what is a quality check!
Next, we have summative evaluations. Summative is the final
evaluation. For example, determining the ROI, determining if
students learned, etc.
The difference between formative and summative is fairly easy
to understand. Formative is rather simple (i.e., quality check)
and summative is more final (high-stakes).
When conducting a summative evaluation we first need to
determine why we are going to do it. What is the purpose of the
evaluation? From this purpose, we develop key questions which
103
help to guide the rest of the evaluation. These key questions are
the ‘what’ we seek to gain/learn/get from this evaluation. There
can be one question or many depending on what we want to
find out! Once we have our key questions we can select an
evaluation model. The model we choose should be the model
that best helps us answer our questions.
Most often this is Kirkpatrick’s model. When I say it’s used most
often, it’s used over 99% of the time (yes I made up that 99%
statistic but I have rarely seen an alternative being used).
Kirkpatrick’s model is a buzzword within the field. If you're going
to learn one evaluation model in our field, this is the one you're
going to learn because it's hands down the most popular. It does
a good job of addressing the impact of training courses,
programs, and products so it's really good for use in our field for
a number of reasons.
Having said that, let’s talk about Kirkpatrick's model. There are
four levels to Kirkpatrick's model (Kirkpatrick, 1994):
Table 14.0
| Kirkpatrick’s model |
|---|
| Level 1 – Learner satisfaction |
| Level 2 – Learning |
| Level 3 – Transfer to job |
| Level 4 – Return on investment |
Level 1 is learner satisfaction. Did the learners enjoy the
training? Did they like it? What did they dislike? Our goal here is
to determine if the learners were happy with the training and
what they believe could be improved. While learner satisfaction
isn’t always important (i.e. certain types of strenuous training)
the data it provides can help inform the instructors, clients,
developers, etc. what can be improved in the future.
Level 2 is learning. Did learning occur and if so, by how much?
Thus in order to perform that measurement, it’s beneficial to
offer a pre- and post-test so that you can compare the results.
Keep in mind that learner satisfaction is not necessarily
correlated with learning. So you can have satisfied learners that
didn’t learn anything and vice versa. This is why you must
measure learning to be sure. Additionally, this helps determine
training effectiveness and can be used to help support levels 3
and 4.
Levels 3 and 4 are more difficult to capture and as a result not
performed as often in most organizations.
Level 3 is transfer of behavior. Are the learners doing what they
learned on the job? To collect this data you may need to observe
behavior, analyze performance data, interview employees,
and/or distribute surveys. This can be done at any future point
after the training, 1 month, 6 months, or a year - it’s going to be
up to the client. I cannot recommend a timeframe because the
project goals and client needs should indicate when this could
happen.
Level 4 looks at the impacts. What was the return on
investment? Before we start the training project, we always
figure out what we believe the return on investment of this
project is going to be; some kind of performance metric that we
can objectively measure. Then we try to assess if this occurred.
This would depend on the project goals, for example, less errors
in assembly, money savings, more productivity, etc. It’s going to
depend on the project.
If we were writing an evaluation report out for a client it would
be organized similar to the following:
1. Background/Client
2. Stakeholders
3. Key Questions
4. Model selected
5. Data collection and Findings
6. Recommendations based on findings